### Czy pierwsi chrześcijanie byli staranni?

Zostało szeroko przyjęte, że pierwsi Chrześcijanie byli albo obojętni, albo niezdolni do czuwania nad czystością tekstu. (Przypomnij sobie słowa Horta przytoczone powyżej). Ponownie konieczny jest przegląd założeń. Wielu z pierwszych wierzących było pobożnymi Żydami, którzy mieli zakorzeniony szacunek i troskę o Pismo Starego Testamentu, sięgające najdrobniejszej kropki czy kreski. Ten szacunek i troska w naturalny sposób rozciągały się również na Pismo Nowego Testamentu.

Why should modern critics assume that the early Christians, in particular the spiritual leaders among them, were inferior in integrity or intelligence? A Father’s quoting from memory, or tailoring a passage to suit his purpose in sermon or letter, by no means implies that he would take similar liberties when transcribing a book or corpus. Ordinary honesty would require him to produce a faithful copy. Are we to assume that everyone who made copies of New Testament books in those early years was a knave, or a fool? Paul was certainly as intelligent a man as any of us. If Hebrews was written by someone else, here was another man of high spiritual insight and intellectual power. There was Barnabas and Apollos and Clement and Polycarp, etc., etc. The Church has had men of reason and intelligence all down through the years. Starting out with what they **knew** to be the pure text, the earliest Fathers did not need to be textual critics. They had only to be reasonably honest and careful. But is there not good reason to believe they would be **especially** watchful and careful?