## Uwagi końcowe

Do tego miejsca zajmowałem się szerokim nurtem normalnego przebiegu przekazywania Tekstu Nowego Testamentu. Ten szeroki nurt jest powszechnie określany jako „bizantyjski” tekst lub typ tekstu. Jednak ten szeroki nurt składa się z wielu odrębnych linii przekazu – przypomnijmy, że F. Wisse wyodrębnił 36 takich linii na podstawie swoich badań nad Ewangelią Łukasza, rozdziałami 1, 10 i 20. Spośród tych 36 linii jedna jest zdecydowanie największa pod względem liczby reprezentatywnych manuskryptów i będę argumentował, że jest ona również bez wątpienia najlepsza. Nazywam tę linię przekazu „Rodziną 35”, a moje omówienie tej „rodziny” zajmuje część II.[^ta-czesc-to-reprodukcja-identity-rozdzial-5]. Tam będę argumentował, że Rodzina 35 stanowi ostateczny dowód na to, że Bóg zachował Tekst Nowego Testamentu.

Given my presuppositions, I consider that I have good reason for declaring the divine preservation of the precise original wording of the complete New Testament Text, to this day. That wording is reproduced in my edition of the Greek NT, *The Greek New Testament According to Family 35*. The book may be ordered from Amazon.com, and it may be downloaded from my site, www.prunch.org. I here list my conclusions, promising the reader that I will then give the evidence that leads to those conclusions (besides that already given above).

On the basis of the evidence so far available I affirm the following:

1. The original wording was never ‘lost’, and its transmission down through the years was basically normal, being recognized as inspired material from the beginning.
2. That normal process resulted in lines of transmission.
3. To delineate such lines, MSS must be grouped empirically on the basis of a shared mosaic of readings.
4. Such groups or families must be evaluated for independence and credibility.
5. The largest clearly defined group is Family 35.
6. Family 35 is demonstrably independent of all other lines of transmission throughout the NT.
7. Family 35 is demonstrably ancient, dating to the 3rd century, at least.
8. Family 35 representatives come from all over the Mediterranean area, the geographical distribution is all but total.
9. Family 35 is not a recension, was not created at some point subsequent to the Autographs.
10. Family 35 is an objectively/empirically defined entity throughout the NT, it has a demonstrable, diagnostic profile from Matthew 1,1 to Revelation 22,21. (That profile is given in Part II.)
11. The archetypal form of Family 35 is demonstrable—it has been demonstrated.
12. The Original Text is the ultimate archetype, any candidate must also be an archetype—a real, honest to goodness, objectively verifiable archetype, there is only one—Family 35.
13. God’s concern for the preservation of the Biblical Text is evident: I take it that passages such as 1 Chronicles 16,15, Psalm 119,89, Isaiah 40,8, Matthew 5,18, Luke 16,17 and 21,33, John 10,35 and 16,12-13, 1 Peter 1,23-25 and Luke 4,4 may reasonably be taken to imply a promise that the Scriptures (to the tittle) will be preserved for man’s use (we are to live "by *every* word of God"), and to the end of the world (“for a thousand generations”), but no intimation is given as to just how God proposed to do it. We must deduce the answer from what He has indeed done—we discover that He **did**!
14. This concern is reflected in Family 35, it is characterized by incredibly careful transmission (in contrast to other lines). (I have a perfect copy of the Family 35 archetypal text for most NT books (22), I have copies made from a perfect exemplar (presumed) for another four (4), as I continue to collate MSS I hope to add the last one (Acts), but even for it the archetypal form is demonstrable.)
15. If God was preserving the original wording in some line of transmission other than Family 35, would that line be any less careful? I think not. So any line of transmission characterized by internal confusion is disqualified—this includes **all** the other lines of transmission that I have seen so far.
16. I affirm that God used Family 35 to preserve the precise original wording of the New Testament Text, it is reproduced in my edition of the Greek Text.[^i-Bog-uzyl-glownie]

**I claim to have demonstrated the superiority of Family 35 based on *size*** (number of representatives), ***independence*** (it is demonstrably independent of all other lines of transmission), ***age*** (it dates to the 3rd century, at least), ***geographical distribution*** (all over the Mediterranean area), ***profile*** (empirically determined), ***care*** (by the copyists) and ***range*** (all 27 books). **I challenge any and all to do the same for any other line of transmission!**

The Original Text is the ultimate archetype, any candidate must also be an archetype—a real, honest to goodness, objectively verifiable archetype, there is only one that has been identified so far—Family 35. I now move on to Part II, where I provide further evidence, the evidence that gives rise to my conclusions.

[^ta-czesc-to-reprodukcja-identity-rozdzial-5]: This Part I is basically a reproduction (with a few embellishments) of Chapter 5 in my book, *The Identity of the New Testament Text IV*, available from Amazon.com, as well as from my site, www.prunch.org. My refutation of eclecticism, whether ‘reasoned’ or ‘rigorous’, occupies Chapter 2 of that book. My refutation of the Westcott-Hort critical theory occupies Chapters 3 & 4. Chapter 6 takes up four “possible objections”: 1. Are not the oldest MSS the best? 2. Why are there no early “Byzantine” MSS? 3. “But there is no evidence of the Byzantine **Text** in the early centuries” 4. Should not witnesses be weighed rather than counted? I direct the interested reader to those discussions. 

[^i-Bog-uzyl-glownie]: And God used mainly the Eastern Orthodox Churches to preserve the NT Text down through the centuries—they have always used a Text that was an adequate representation of the Original, for all practical purposes. Also, among the families of Lectionary MSS, in terms of the number of representatives, Family 35 is the second largest, and it was used in the very first printed edition, the da Sabbio edition of 1539.