# CZĘŚĆ II: Najlepsza linia przekazywania

## Czym właściwie jest Rodzina 35?

Mogę sobie dobrze wyobrazić, że wielu z moich czytelników słyszy o „Rodzinie 35” po raz pierwszy. Termin ten odnosi się do linii przekazu w ramach szerokiego nurtu manuskryptów „bizantyjskich” i to ja nadałem mu tę nazwę. Jak narazie, o ile mi wiadomo, środowisko akademickie całkowicie ignoruje moją pracę, jak zresztą musi, aby być pewnym, ponieważ obnażam fałszywe informacje, które oni rozpowszechniają od pokoleń. Zacznę od odrobiny najnowszej historii.

When Thomas Nelson Inc. published my first book in 1977, *The Iden-tity of the New Testament Text*, the best printed Greek New testament that was readily available was the *Textus Receptus*, the Received Text—it was the Greek Text of the Protestant Reformation. John William Burgon, Dean of Chichester, called it the ‘Traditional Text’. Although Zane C. Hodges and Arthur L. Farstad had started working on a Majority Text, based on the work of Hermann von Soden,1 it was not published until 1982. In 1977 I demonstrated that the Westcott-Hort critical theory was false at every point, and that demonstration has never been refuted since, that I know of. But when it came to offering an alternative, I was limited to generalities and Burgon’s seven “Notes of Truth”.2 Thomas Nelson put my book through at least three further printings, including some revision, the last one appearing in 1990. Even then, I had nothing better to offer.

However, in 1988 I helped to start the Majority Text Society, along with Zane Hodges, Art Farstad and Frank Carmichal, and was its first pre-sident. At that time I began to seriously work on Majority Text theory, and during the next decade developed what I was pleased to call Original Text theory. I used it as a steppingstone to my present approach to NT textual criticism (that we may call Family 35 Priority Theory). Here it is: